Song Cai,William W. Hsieh,Alex J. Cannon~A comparison of bayesian and conditional density models in probabilistic ozone forecasting.~Probabilistic models were developed to provide predictive distributions of daily maximum surface level ozone concentrations. Five forecast models were compared at two stations (Chilliwack and Surrey) in the Lower Fraser Valley of British Columbia, Canada, with local meteorological variables used as predictors. The models were of two types, conditional density models and Bayesian models. The Bayesian models (especially the Gaussian Processes) gave better forecasts for extreme events, namely poor air quality events defined as having ozone concentration ges 82 ppb.~null
Hayri Önal,Yicheng Wang~A graph theory approach for designing conservation reserve networks with minimal fragmentation.~Habitat fragmentation is often cited as one of the most important factors that adversely affect species persistence and survival ability. Contiguity of habitat sites is usually desirable when designing a conservation reserve. If a contiguous reserve is not feasible, due to landscape characteristics or economic constraints, designing a reserve network with minimal fragmentation may be a viable strategy. This article presents a linear integer programming formulation of the problem using graph theory concepts. A graph is constructed where nodes correspond to individual sites and directed arcs are defined for pairs of nodes corresponding to adjacent sites. The model determines a minimal representative tree as a subgraph where each node in the tree corresponds to either a selected reserve site or a gap site. Reserve fragmentation is defined as the sum of gap sites, which is to be minimized. An important computational problem is the formation of cycles when determining the minimal representative tree. This problem is resolved using an iterative procedure that utilizes Dantzig-cuts when a cycle occurs in the solution. Arbitrarily generated data sets are used to explore the computational efficiency of this approach. Finally an empirical application of the model to a real data set involving 744 sites and 32 endangered-threatened bird species is presented.~null
Soumya Banerjee,Melanie E. Moses~A Hybrid Agent Based and Differential Equation Model of Body Size Effects on Pathogen Replication and Immune System Response.~Many emerging pathogens infect multiple host species [1], and multi-host pathogens may have very different dynamics in different host species [2]. This research addresses how pathogen replication rates and Immune System (IS) response times are constrained by host body size. An Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) model is used to show that pathogen replication rates decline with host body size but IS response rates remain invariant with body size. An Agent-Based Model (ABM) is used to investigate two models of IS architecture that could explain scale invariance of IS response rates. A stage structured hybrid model is proposed that strikes a balance between the detailed representation of an ABM and computational tractability of an ODE, by using them in the initial and latter stages of an infection, respectively.~null
Steven J. Phillips,Miroslav Dudík,Robert E. Schapire~A maximum entropy approach to species distribution modeling.~We study the problem of modeling species geographic distributions, a critical problem in conservation biology. We propose the use of maximum-entropy techniques for this problem, specifically, sequential-update algorithms that can handle a very large number of features. We describe experiments comparing maxent with a standard distribution-modeling tool, called GARP, on a dataset containing observation data for North American breeding birds. We also study how well maxent performs as a function of the number of training examples and training time, analyze the use of regularization to avoid overfitting when the number of examples is small, and explore the interpretability of models constructed using maxent.~Logistic Regression, AdaBoost and Bregman Distances. Inducing Features of Random Fields Logistic Regression, AdaBoost and Bregman Distances. Inducing Features of Random Fields. Sequential Conditional Generalized Iterative Scaling. 
Kathleen M. Carley,Douglas B. Fridsma,Elizabeth Casman,Alex Yahja,N. Altman,Li-Chiou Chen,Boris Kaminsky,Démian Nave~BioWar: Scalable Agent-Based Model of Bioattacks.~While structured by social and institutional networks, disease outbreaks are modulated by physical, economical, technological, communication, health, and governmental infrastructures. To systematically reason about the nature of outbreaks, the potential outcomes of media, prophylaxis, and vaccination campaigns, and the relative value of various early warning devices, social context, and infrastructure, must be considered. Numerical models provide a cost-effective ethical system for reasoning about such events. BioWar, a scalable citywide multiagent network numerical model, is described in this paper. BioWar simulates individuals as agents who are embedded in social, health, and professional networks and tracks the incidence of background and maliciously introduced diseases. In addition to epidemiology, BioWar simulates health-care-seeking behaviors, absenteeism patterns, and pharmaceutical purchases, information useful for syndromic and behavioral surveillance algorithms.~null
Daniel Sheldon,M. A. Saleh Elmohamed,Dexter Kozen~Collective Inference on Markov Models for Modeling Bird Migration.~We investigate a family of inference problems on Markov models, where many sample paths are drawn from a Markov chain and partial information is revealed to an observer who attempts to reconstruct the sample paths. We present algorithms and hardness results for several variants of this problem which arise by revealing different information to the observer and imposing different requirements for the reconstruction of sample paths. Our algorithms are analogous to the classical Viterbi algorithm for Hidden Markov Models, which finds single most probable sample path given a sequence of observations. Our work is motivated by an important application in ecology: inferring bird migration paths from a large database of observations.~null
Nathan Eagle,Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye,Luís M. A. Bettencourt~Community Computing: Comparisons between Rural and Urban Societies Using Mobile Phone Data.~We present a comparative analysis of the behavioral dynamics of rural and urban societies using four years of mobile phone data from all 1.4M subscribers within a small country. We use information from communication logs and top up denominations to characterize attributes such as socioeconomic status and region. We show that rural and urban communities differ dramatically not only in terms of personal network topologies, but also in terms of inferred behavioral characteristics such as travel. We confirm the hypothesis for behavioral adaptation, demonstrating that individuals change their patterns of communication to increase the similarity with their new social environment. To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive comparison between regional groups of this size.~null
Debprakash Patnaik,Manish Marwah,Ratnesh K. Sharma,Naren Ramakrishnan~Data Mining for Modeling Chiller Systems in Data Centers.~We present a data mining approach to model the cooling infrastructure in data centers, particularly the chiller ensemble. These infrastructures are poorly understood due to the lack of  first principles  models of chiller systems. At the same time, they abound in data due to instrumentation by modern sensor networks. We present a multi-level framework to transduce sensor streams into an actionable dynamic Bayesian network model of the system. This network is then used to explain observed system transitions and aid in diagnostics and prediction. We showcase experimental results using a HP data center in Bangalore, India.~null
Michael Steinbach,Pang-Ning Tan,Vipin Kumar,Steven A. Klooster,Christopher Potter~Discovery of climate indices using clustering.~To analyze the effect of the oceans and atmosphere on land climate, Earth Scientists have developed climate indices, which are time series that summarize the behavior of selected regions of the Earth's oceans and atmosphere. In the past, Earth scientists have used observation and, more recently, eigenvalue analysis techniques, such as principal components analysis (PCA) and singular value decomposition (SVD), to discover climate indices. However, eigenvalue techniques are only useful for finding a few of the strongest signals. Furthermore, they impose a condition that all discovered signals must be orthogonal to each other, making it difficult to attach a physical interpretation to them. This paper presents an alternative clustering-based methodology for the discovery of climate indices that overcomes these limitiations and is based on clusters that represent regions with relatively homogeneous behavior. The centroids of these clusters are time series that summarize the behavior of the ocean or atmosphere in those regions. Some of these centroids correspond to known climate indices and provide a validation of our methodology; other centroids are variants of known indices that may provide better predictive power for some land areas; and still other indices may represent potentially new Earth science phenomena. Finally, we show that cluster based indices generally outperform SVD derived indices, both in terms of area weighted correlation and direct correlation with the known indices.~Algorithms for Clustering Data 
Vipin Kumar~Discovery of Patterns in Global Earth Science Data Using Data Mining.~The climate and earth sciences have recently undergone a rapid transformation from a data-poor to a data-rich environment. In particular, climate and ecosystem related observations from remote sensors on satellites, as well as outputs of climate or earth system models from large-scale computational platforms, provide terabytes of temporal, spatial and spatio-temporal data. These massive and information-rich datasets offer huge potential for understanding and predicting the behavior of the Earth's ecosystem and for advancing the science of climate change.~null
Jennifer Mankoff,Eli Blevis,Alan Borning,Batya Friedman,Susan R. Fussell,Jay Hasbrouck,Allison Woodruff,Phoebe Sengers~Environmental sustainability and interaction.~By its nature, the discipline of human computer interaction must take into consideration the issues that are most pertinent to humans. We believe that the CHI community faces an unanswered challenge in the creation of interactive systems: sustainability. For example, climate scientists argue that the most serious consequences of climate change can be averted, but only if fundamental changes are made. The goal of this SIG is to raise awareness of these issues in the CHI community and to start a conversation about the possibilities and responsibilities we have to address issues of sustainability.~Leveraging Social Networks To Motivate Individuals to Reduce their Ecological Footprints. Design decisions in the RideNow project. Sustainable interaction design: invention & disposal, renewal & reuse. Informing Public Deliberation: Value Sensitive Design of Indicators for a Large-scale Urban Simulation. 
Christopher L. Barrett,Keith R. Bisset,Stephen Eubank,Xizhou Feng,Madhav V. Marathe~EpiSimdemics: an efficient algorithm for simulating the spread of infectious disease over large realistic social networks.~Preventing and controlling outbreaks of infectious diseases such as pandemic influenza is a top public health priority. We describe EpiSimdemics - a scalable parallel algorithm to simulate the spread of contagion in large, realistic social contact networks using individual-based models. EpiSimdemics is an interaction-based simulation of a certain class of stochastic reaction-diffusion processes. Straightforward simulations of such process do not scale well, limiting the use of individual-based models to very small populations. EpiSimdemics is specifically designed to scale to social networks with 100 million individuals. The scaling is obtained by exploiting the semantics of disease evolution and disease propagation in large networks. We evaluate an MPI-based parallel implementation of EpiSimdemics on a mid-sized HPC system, demonstrating that EpiSimdemics scales well. EpiSimdemics has been used in numerous sponsor defined case studies targeted at policy planning and course of action analysis, demonstrating the usefulness of EpiSimdemics in practical situations.~Parallel and distributed simulation: traditional techniques and recent advances. Scalable, efficient epidemiological simulation. Parallel Discrete Event Simulation. Structural and algorithmic aspects of massive social networks. A flexible, large-scale, distributed agent based epidemic model. 
Margo Bergman~Evaluating Agent-Based Modeling as a Tool for Economists.~Agent-Based Modeling has the capability to become a very powerful tool in economics, but in order to achieve this will require a great deal of effort on the part of its current practitioners. Economics at its core studies people and their actions. This is inherently difficult to do since the motivation of people is not always discernible. A method by which the variety of human behavior could be mimicked, thus providing insight into the process of decision-making that underlies the behaviors, would be invaluable to researchers. Agent-based modeling is such a method. In situations where analytical methods are not sufficient to answer the questions posed, agent-based modeling can be used to obtain solutions to interesting problems, and assess their robustness. However, until the majority of economists accept agent-based modeling as a legitimate tool, the adequacy of the results will remain in question. Certainly one area that will have to be addressed in order to expand the potential of agent-based modeling in economics is sheer exposure. However, more important to its acceptance will be advancements in the cohesiveness of the discipline. The purpose of this note is to present a series of question that must be answered before agent-based modeling can become accepted as a powerful economic tool.~null
Cynthia Sims Parr,Andriy Parafiynyk,Joel Sachs,Li Ding,Sandor Dornbush,Timothy W. Finin,David Wang,Allan Hollander~Integrating ecoinformatics resources on the semantic web.~We describe ELVIS (the Ecosystem Location Visualization and Information System), a suite of tools for constructing food webs for a given location. We express both ELVIS input and output data in OWL, thereby enabling its integration with other semantic web resources. In particular, we describe using a Triple Shop application to answer SPARQL queries from a collection of semantic web documents. This is an end-to-end case study of the semantic web's utility for ecological and environmental research.~Managing Scientific Metadata. Swoogle: a search and metadata engine for the semantic web. 
Shyam Boriah,Vipin Kumar,Michael Steinbach,Christopher Potter,Steven A. Klooster~Land cover change detection: a case study.~The study of land cover change is an important problem in the Earth Science domain because of its impacts on local climate, radiation balance, biogeochemistry, hydrology, and the diversity and abundance of terrestrial species. Most well-known change detection techniques from statistics, signal processing and control theory are not well-suited for the massive high-dimensional spatio-temporal data sets from Earth Science due to limitations such as high computational complexity and the inability to take advantage of seasonality and spatio-temporal autocorrelation inherent in Earth Science data. In our work, we seek to address these challenges with new change detection techniques that are based on data mining approaches. Specifically, in this paper we have performed a case study for a new change detection technique for the land cover change detection problem. We study land cover change in the state of California, focusing on the San Francisco Bay Area and perform an extended study on the entire state. We also perform a comparative evaluation on forests in the entire state. These results demonstrate the utility of data mining techniques for the land cover change detection problem.~A unifying framework for detecting outliers and change points from non-stationary time series data. Event Detection from Time Series Data. Modeling Multiple Time Series for Anomaly Detection. Discovery of climate indices using clustering. 
Thomas G. Dietterich~Machine Learning in Ecosystem Informatics.~The emerging field of Ecosystem Informatics applies methods from computer science and mathematics to address fundamental and applied problems in the ecosystem sciences. The ecosystem sciences are in the midst of a revolution driven by a combination of emerging technologies for improved sensing and the critical need for better science to help manage global climate change. This paper describes several initiatives at Oregon State University in ecosystem informatics. At the level of sensor technologies, this paper describes two projects: (a) wireless, battery-free sensor networks for forests and (b) rapid throughput automated arthropod population counting. At the level of data preparation and data cleaning, this paper describes the application of linear gaussian dynamic Bayesian networks to automated anomaly detection in temperature data streams. Finally, the paper describes two educational activities: (a) a summer institute in ecosystem informatics and (b) an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program in Ecosystem Informatics for mathematics, computer science, and the ecosystem sciences.~Saliency, Scale and Image Description. Logistic Model Trees. Automated insect identification through concatenated histograms of local appearance features: feature vector generation and region detection for deformable objects. Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. Scale & Affine Invariant Interest Point Detectors. 
Carl F. DiSalvo,Phoebe Sengers,Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir~Mapping the landscape of sustainable HCI.~With the recent growth in sustainable HCI, now is a good time to map out the approaches being taken and the intellectual commitments that underlie the area, to allow for community discussion about where the field should go. Here, we provide an empirical analysis of how sustainable HCI is defining itself as a research field. Based on a corpus of published works, we identify (1) established genres in the area, (2) key unrecognized intellectual differences, and (3) emerging issues, including urgent avenues for further exploration, opportunities for interdisciplinary engagement, and key topics for debate.~DIY for CHI: methods, communities, and values of reuse and customization. Investigating the impact of a minimalist in-home energy consumption display. Designing with unconscious human behaviors for eco-friendly interaction. Coralog: use-aware visualization connecting human micro-activities to environmental change. Human computer biosphere interaction: towards a sustainable society. Defining the role of HCI in the challenges of sustainability. Three environmental discourses in human-computer interaction. Material awareness: promoting reflection on everyday materiality. 
Andreas Krause,Carlos Guestrin~Near-optimal Observation Selection using Submodular Functions.~AI problems such as autonomous robotic exploration, automatic diagnosis and activity recognition have in common the need for choosing among a set of informative but possibly expensive observations. When monitoring spatial phenomena with sensor networks or mobile robots, for example, we need to decide which locations to observe in order to most effectively decrease the uncertainty, at minimum cost. These problems usually are NP-hard. Many observation selection objectives satisfy submodularity, an intuitive diminishing returns property - adding a sensor to a small deployment helps more than adding it to a large deployment. In this paper, we survey recent advances in systematically exploiting this submodularity property to efficiently achieve near-optimal observation selections, under complex constraints. We illustrate the effectiveness of our approaches on problems of monitoring environmental phenomena and water distribution networks.~Near-optimal sensor placements in Gaussian processes. Batch mode active learning and its application to medical image classification. Deploying wireless sensors to achieve both coverage and connectivity. Near-optimal sensor placements: maximizing information while minimizing communication cost. A Recursive Greedy Algorithm for Walks in Directed Graphs. Maximizing the spread of influence through a social network. 
Aiming Wu,William W. Hsieh,Benyang Tang~Neural network forecasts of the tropical Pacific sea surface temperatures.~A nonlinear forecast system for the sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies over the whole tropical Pacific has been developed using a multi-layer perceptron neural network approach, where sea level pressure and SST anomalies were used as predictors to predict the five leading SST principal components at lead times from 3 to 15 months. Relative to the linear regression (LR) models, the nonlinear (NL) models showed higher correlation skills and lower root mean square errors over most areas of the domain, especially over the far western Pacific (west of 155 degrees E) and the eastern equatorial Pacific off Peru at lead times longer than 3 months, with correlation skills enhanced by 0.10-0.14. Seasonal and decadal changes in the prediction skills in the NL and LR models were also studied.~null
Richard J. Williams,Neo D. Martinez,Jennifer Golbeck~Ontologies for ecoinformatics.~Rapid advances in information technologies continue to drive a flood of data and analysis techniques in ecological and environmental sciences. Using these resources more effectively and taking advantage of associated cross-disciplinary research opportunities poses a major challenge to both scientists and information technologists. These challenges are now being addressed in projects that apply knowledge representation and Semantic Web technologies to problems in discovering and integrating ecological data and data analysis techniques. In this paper, we present an overview of the major ontological components of our project, SEEK (''Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge''). We describe the concepts and models that are represented in each, and present a discussion of potential applications of these ontologies on the Semantic Web.~Interactive 3D visualization of highly connected ecological networks on the WWW. 
Justin C. Williams~Optimal reserve site selection with distance requirements.~The reserve set covering problem minimizes the total cost or area of sites needed to represent all species within a system of nature reserves, but does not address spatial characteristics such as distances between reserve sites. Inter-site distance, as a surrogate for connectivity, is likely to affect species persistence and other functional aspects of reserve systems. Two new 0-1 programming models that build upon the reserve set covering problem are formulated for controlling inter-site distance. Depending on the circumstances, longer or shorter inter-site distances may be desirable, and arguments for each case are discussed. The first model requires reserves to be at least a minimum separation distance apart. The second model requires at least two representations of each species and also requires the sites that represent a species to be no farther apart than a stated proximity distance. These models are applied to four demonstration problems in which both synthetic and real presence/absence data are used. Results and computational experience are discussed. The first model achieves site dispersal while the second model achieves site connectivity to the extent that each is compatible with set covering.~null
Bistra N. Dilkina,Carla P. Gomes~Solving Connected Subgraph Problems in Wildlife Conservation.~We investigate mathematical formulations and solution techniques for a variant of the Connected Subgraph Problem. Given a connected graph with costs and profits associated with the nodes, the goal is to find a connected subgraph that contains a subset of distinguished vertices. In this work we focus on the budget-constrained version, where we maximize the total profit of the nodes in the subgraph subject to a budget constraint on the total cost. We propose several mixed-integer formulations for enforcing the subgraph connectivity requirement, which plays a key role in the combinatorial structure of the problem. We show that a new formulation based on subtour elimination constraints is more effective at capturing the combinatorial structure of the problem, providing significant advantages over the previously considered encoding which was based on a single commodity flow. We test our formulations on synthetic instances as well as on real-world instances of an important problem in environmental conservation concerning the design of wildlife corridors. Our encoding results in a much tighter LP relaxation, and more importantly, it results in finding better integer feasible solutions as well as much better upper bounds on the objective (often proving optimality or within less than 1% of optimality), both when considering the synthetic instances as well as the real-world wildlife corridor instances.~null
Jennifer Mankoff,Robin Kravets,Eli Blevis~Some Computer Science Issues in Creating a Sustainable World.~Computer scientists have a role to play in combating global climate change.~null
Aurelie C. Lozano,Hongfei Li,Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil,Yan Liu 0002,Claudia Perlich,Jonathan R. M. Hosking,Naoki Abe~Spatial-temporal causal modeling for climate change attribution.~Attribution of climate change to causal factors has been based predominantly on simulations using physical climate models, which have inherent limitations in describing such a complex and chaotic system. We propose an alternative, data centric, approach that relies on actual measurements of climate observations and human and natural forcing factors. Specifically, we develop a novel method to infer causality from spatial-temporal data, as well as a procedure to incorporate extreme value modeling into our method in order to address the attribution of extreme climate events, such as heatwaves. Our experimental results on a real world dataset indicate that changes in temperature are not solely accounted for by solar radiance, but attributed more significantly to CO2 and other greenhouse gases. Combined with extreme value modeling, we also show that there has been a significant increase in the intensity of extreme temperatures, and that such changes in extreme temperature are also attributable to greenhouse gases. These preliminary results suggest that our approach can offer a useful alternative to the simulation-based approach to climate modeling and attribution, and provide valuable insights from a fresh perspective.~null
Debprakash Patnaik,Manish Marwah,Ratnesh K. Sharma,Naren Ramakrishnan~Sustainable operation and management of data center chillers using temporal data mining.~Motivation: Data centers are a critical component of modern IT infrastructure but are also among the worst environmental offenders through their increasing energy usage and the resulting large carbon footprints. Efficient management of data centers, including power management, networking, and cooling infrastructure, is hence crucial to sustainability. In the absence of a 'first-principles' approach to manage these complex components and their interactions, data-driven approaches have become attractive and tenable. Results: We present a temporal data mining solution to model and optimize performance of data center chillers, a key component of the cooling infrastructure. It helps bridge raw, numeric, time-series information from sensor streams toward higher level characterizations of chiller behavior, suitable for a data center engineer. To aid in this transduction, temporal data streams are first encoded into a symbolic representation, next run-length encoded segments are mined to form frequent motifs in time series, and finally these metrics are evaluated by their contributions to sustainability. A key innovation in our application is the ability to intersperse "don't care" transitions (e.g., transients) in continuous-valued time series data, an advantage we inherit by the application of frequent episode mining to symbolized representations of numeric time series. Our approach provides both qualitative and quantitative characterizations of the sensor streams to the data center engineer, to aid him in tuning chiller operating characteristics. This system is currently being prototyped for a data center managed by HP and experimental results from this application reveal the promise of our approach.~InteMon: continuous mining of sensor data in large-scale self-infrastructures. Probabilistic discovery of time series motifs. Querying and mining of time series data: experimental comparison of representations and distance measures. Higher order mining. Modeling changing dependency structure in multivariate time series. InteMon: Intelligent System Monitoring on Large Clusters. Discovering Frequent Episodes and Learning Hidden Markov Models: A Formal Connection. Stream prediction using a generative model based on frequent episodes in event sequences. Failure Prediction in IBM BlueGene/L Event Logs. A symbolic representation of time series, with implications for streaming algorithms. Experiencing SAX: a novel symbolic representation of time series. Discovery of Frequent Episodes in Event Sequences. LiveRAC: interactive visual exploration of system management time-series data. Streaming Pattern Discovery in Multiple Time-Series. Mining Motifs in Massive Time Series Databases. On building next generation data centers: energy flow in the information technology stack. Detecting time series motifs under uniform scaling. 
Nathan Eagle~txteagle: Mobile Crowdsourcing.~We present txteagle, a system that enables people to earn small amounts of money by completing simple tasks on their mobile phone for corporations who pay them in either airtime or MPESA (mobile money). The system is currently being launched in Kenya and Rwanda in collaboration with the mobile phone service providers Safaricom and MTN Rwanda. Tasks include translation, transcription, and surveys. User studies in Nairobi involving high school students, taxi drivers, and local security guards have been completed and the service has recently launched in Kenya nationwide.~null
Chris L. Barrett, Stephen G. Eubank, James P. Smith~If Smallpox Strikes Portland~Suppose terrorists were to release plague in Chicago, and health officials, faced with limited resources and personnel, had to quickly choose the most effective response. Would mass administration of antibiotics be the best way to halt an outbreak?~null
J. Bayard, C.  Nadkarni, N. Kadkarni, B. Bond, R. Dial~How trees and forests inform biodiversity and ecosystem informatics~To solve critical biosphere-level problems such as global warming, decreased biodiversity, and natural resource depletion, scientists must integrate data from many researchers. This, in turn, requires better data infrastructure and informatics tools than are currently available. The Canopy Database Project brings together computer scientists and ecologists to develop informatics tools for forest canopy research that meet such ecosystem informatics challenges.~null
Rich Caruana, Mohamed Elhawary, Art Munson, Mirek Riedewald, Daria Sorokina, Daniel Fink, Wesley M. Hochachka, Steve Kelling~Mining citizen science data to predict prevalence of wild bird species~The Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology's mission is to interpret and conserve the earth's biological diversity through research, education, and citizen science focused on birds. Over the years, the Lab has accumulated one of the largest and longest-running collections of environmental data sets in existence. The data sets are not only large, but also have many attributes, contain many missing values, and potentially are very noisy. The ecologists are interested in identifying which features have the strongest effect on the distribution and abundance of bird species as well as describing the forms of these relationships. We show how data mining can be successfully applied, enabling the ecologists to discover unanticipated relationships. We compare a variety of methods for measuring attribute importance with respect to the probability of a bird being observed at a feeder and present initial results for the impact of important attributes on bird prevalence.~null
Raphael Duboz, Eric Ramat, Philippe Preux~Scale transfer modeling: using emergent computation for coupling an ordinary differential equation system with a reactive agent model~This article deals with the coupling of analytical models with individual based models design with the reactive agents paradigm. Such a coupling of models of different natures is motivated by the need to find a way to model scale transfer in large complex systems, i.e. to model how low level of organization can be made to influence upper level and vice versa. This is a fundamental issue, and more particularly in ecological modeling where models are a real scientific tool of investigation. Individuals and populations are not described at the same scale of time and space but it is known that they act on each others. Based on this example, we model individuals in their environment and the population dynamics. While behavior is best modeled using an algorithmic framework (the reactive agent paradigm), population dynamics (because of the number of interacting entities) is best modeled using numerical models. We propose the use of the concept of emergent computation as a framework for coupling heterogeneous formalisms. In the same time, it is crucial to be aware of the consequences of the simplifications and of the choices that are made in the reactive agent model, such as the topology of space and various parameters. In this article, we discuss these issues and our approach on a case study drawn from marine ecology and we show that it is possible to find classical mathematical functional responses with a reactive agent system. Then, we propose a methodology to deal with the coupling of heterogeneous formalism useful in any kind of system modeling.~null
Miroslav Dudik, Steven J. Phillips, Robert E. Schapire~Maximum Entropy Density Estimation with Generalized Regularization and an Application to Species Distribution Modeling~We present a unified and complete account of maximum entropy density estimation subject to constraints represented by convex potential functions or, alternatively, by convex regularization. We provide fully general performance guarantees and an algorithm with a complete convergence proof. As special cases, we easily derive performance guarantees for many known regularization types, including l1, l2, l22, and l2 + l22 style regularization. We propose an algorithm solving a large and general subclass of generalized maximum entropy problems, including all discussed in the paper, and prove its convergence. Our approach generalizes and unifies techniques based on information geometry and Bregman divergences as well as those based more directly on compactness. Our work is motivated by a novel application of maximum entropy to species distribution modeling, an important problem in conservation biology and ecology. In a set of experiments on real-world data, we demonstrate the utility of maximum entropy in this setting. We explore effects of different feature types, sample sizes, and regularization levels on the performance of maxent, and discuss interpretability of the resulting models.~null
Stephen Eubank, Hasan Guclu, V S Anil Kumar, Madhav V Marathe, Aravind Srinivasan, Zoltan Toroczkai, Nan Wang~Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks.~Most mathematical models for the spread of disease use differential equations based on uniform mixing assumptions or ad hoc models for the contact process. Here we explore the use of dynamic bipartite graphs to model the physical contact patterns that result from movements of individuals between specific locations. The graphs are generated by large-scale individual-based urban traffic simulations built on actual census, land-use and population-mobility data. We find that the contact network among people is a strongly connected small-world-like graph with a well-defined scale for the degree distribution. However, the locations graph is scale-free, which allows highly efficient outbreak detection by placing sensors in the hubs of the locations network. Within this large-scale simulation framework, we then analyse the relative merits of several proposed mitigation strategies for smallpox spread. Our results suggest that outbreaks can be contained by a strategy of targeted vaccination combined with early detection without resorting to mass vaccination of a population.~null
C J Long, D Bunker, X Li, V L Karen, I Takeuchi~Rapid identification of structural phases in combinatorial thin-film libraries using x-ray diffraction and non-negative matrix factorization.~In this work we apply a technique called non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to the problem of analyzing hundreds of x-ray microdiffraction (microXRD) patterns from a combinatorial materials library. An in-house scanning x-ray microdiffractometer is used to obtain microXRD patterns from 273 different compositions on a single composition spread library. NMF is then used to identify the unique microXRD patterns present in the system and quantify the contribution of each of these basis patterns to each experimental diffraction pattern. As a baseline, the results of NMF are compared to the results obtained using principle component analysis. The basis patterns found using NMF are then compared to reference patterns from a database of known structural patterns in order to identify known structures. As an example system, we explore a region of the Fe-Ga-Pd ternary system. The use of NMF in this case reduces the arduous task of analyzing hundreds of microXRD patterns to the much smaller task of identifying only nine microXRD patterns.~null
Brad H McRae, Brett G Dickson,Timothy H Keitt,Viral B Shah~Using circuit theory to model connectivity in ecology, evolution, and conservation.~Connectivity among populations and habitats is important for a wide range of ecological processes. Understanding, preserving, and restoring connectivity in complex landscapes requires connectivity models and metrics that are reliable, efficient, and process based. We introduce a new class of ecological connectivity models based in electrical circuit theory. Although they have been applied in other disciplines, circuit-theoretic connectivity models are new to ecology. They offer distinct advantages over common analytic connectivity models, including a theoretical basis in random walk theory and an ability to evaluate contributions of multiple dispersal pathways. Resistance, current, and voltage calculated across graphs or raster grids can be related to ecological processes (such as individual movement and gene flow) that occur across large population networks or landscapes. Efficient algorithms can quickly solve networks with millions of nodes, or landscapes with millions of raster cells. Here we review basic circuit theory, discuss relationships between circuit and random walk theories, and describe applications in ecology, evolution, and conservation. We provide examples of how circuit models can be used to predict movement patterns and fates of random walkers in complex landscapes and to identify important habitat patches and movement corridors for conservation planning.~null
Emily Minor, Dean Urban~A graph-theory framework for evaluating landscape connectivity and conservation planning.~Connectivity of habitat patches is thought to be important for movement of genes, individuals, populations, and species over multiple temporal and spatial scales. We used graph theory to characterize multiple aspects of landscape connectivity in a habitat network in the North Carolina Piedmont (U.S.A). We compared this landscape with simulated networks with known topology, resistance to disturbance, and rate of movement. We introduced graph measures such as compartmentalization and clustering, which can be used to identify locations on the landscape that may be especially resilient to human development or areas that may be most suitable for conservation. Our analyses indicated that for songbirds the Piedmont habitat network was well connected. Furthermore, the habitat network had commonalities with planar networks, which exhibit slow movement, and scale-free networks, which are resistant to random disturbances. These results suggest that connectivity in the habitat network was high enough to prevent the negative consequences of isolation but not so high as to allow rapid spread of disease. Our graph-theory framework provided insight into regional and emergent global network properties in an intuitive and visual way and allowed us to make inferences about rates and paths of species movements and vulnerability to disturbance. This approach can be applied easily to assessing habitat connectivity in any fragmented or patchy landscape.~null
P. Vytelingum, T. D. Voice, S. D. Ramchurn, A. Rogers, N. R. Jennings~Intelligent agents for the smart grid~The Intelligent Decentralised Energy-Aware Systems (iDEaS) project at the University of Southampton (see www.ideasproject.info) is developing and demonstrating the application of intelligent agents within the smart grid; a future vision of an electricity distribution network capable of autonomous and intelligent configuration, robust and flexible operation, and two-way information flow between consumers and suppliers. In this demonstration, we show how agent technologies can assist in realising three key components of this vision, specifically: (i) how a home energy management agent is capable of monitoring, visualising and coordinating energy use within the home, (ii) how micro-storage of electricity, coordinated by intelligent agents, can flattern demand across the grid and reduce both costs and carbon emissions, and (iii) how trading agents operating within a novel market mechanism can effectively and robustly distribute energy within the smart grid whilst explicitly accounting for the capacity constraints of the transmission lines.~null
Perukrishnen Vytelingum, Thomas D. Voice, Sarvapali D. Ramchurn, Alex Rogers, Nicholas R. Jennings~Agent-based micro-storage management for the Smart Grid~The use of energy storage devices in homes has been advocated as one of the main ways of saving energy and reducing the reliance on fossil fuels in the future Smart Grid. However, if micro-storage devices are all charged at the same time using power from the electricity grid, it means a higher demand and, hence, requires more generation capacity, results in more carbon emissions, and, in the worst case, breaks down the system due to over-demand. To alleviate such issues, in this paper, we present a novel agent-based micro-storage management technique that allows all (individually-owned) storage devices in the system to converge to profitable, efficient behaviour. Specifically, we provide a general framework within which to analyse the Nash equilibrium of an electricity grid and devise new agent-based storage learning strategies that adapt to market conditions. Taken altogether, our solution shows that, specifically, in the UK electricity market, it is possible to achieve savings of up to 13\% on average for a consumer on his electricity bill with a storage device of 4 kWh. Moreover, we show that there exists an equilibrium where only 38\% of UK households would own storage devices and where social welfare would be also maximised (with an overall annual savings of nearly GBP 1.5B at that equilibrium).~null